## Structure
### Model

The model package is in charge of providing the engine with the rules of chess and providing it with a list of moves from which to choose the best ones. 

Board.java initiates the two dimensional array of *Squares*, which is the logic for the game board with the correct *Pieces* in their starting positions. It also contains methods for cloning and printing boardstates.

Squares contain a Piece, and provide access to their location on the chess board. 

Piece.java is an interface, which is implemented all the different types of Pieces, which have different rules for movement but are all located on a Square, have an individual value assigned to them, and provide an array of *Moves*. 

Moves are the logic for a Move. All moves feature a starting Square (called current), a destination Square, and a Piece to move. When a Move is executed it also updates the Squares involved, and the Piece value for the Piece that was moved. Some Moves have special rules, that mean they function differently. The Move class also handles these.

The Player.java class is in charge of one player in a chess game. It contains information about where the that Player's Pieces are located, and what Pieces remain. It also maintains the Score for the player, which is used by the Engine classes to determine which move is best. It's primary function, however is to provide an array of legal Moves to the Engine.

The Game.java class handles an actual game of chess. This includes asking for Moves from Players and updating the Players statuses after each move. It also checks for mates after each move is made.
### Engine

The engine package contains the logic for the chess engine itself, or how the engine chooses what it considers the best one 
from a list of available moves. It contains the Engine.java interface, which is implemented by a few different classes, each of which is its own implementation of a chess engine. For now among these is the class enabling a human player to manually input moves.

### Connection

The connection package handles connecting the application to the XBoard app. It reads commands from XBoard, given as Strings in an input stream through anonymous pipes automatically generated by XBoard, and similarly outputs commands. Whenever a move is given from XBoard, it is converted to a Move class object by the method convertToMove. This is mostly really straightforward, with only a few special cases required for castling moves (as the engine has a different syntax for them). The only other XBoard commands implemented are "new", which signifies starting a new game with the black pieces (and to wait for a move command to be given), and "go" which tells the engine to start playing a new game with the white pieces.


### MinmaxAB
Briefly the core idea of the algorithm: The best moves for both players are evaluated until the maximum depth is reached or the game ends. Four values are maintained: maxScore, minScore, alpha and beta. Individual positions are evaluated by comparing the value of both players pieces (or in the case the game ends, a move's score is set to 1000000 (mate), or 0.0 (stalemate) as a special case)

Variable maxScore refers to the best score available for the player initiating the search. In this implementation it is received through the move class as an actual move needs to be provided to the game.   

Variable minScore refers to the best score available to the opposing player, again provided by the move itself.     

Variable alpha is the best score the player initiating the search is assured of based on moves already looked at.
Variable beta is the best score the opponent is assured of based on moves already looked at.    

Using alpha and beta some subtrees can be completely ignored, as a better move is guaranteed to exist.  

## Example

Here I will provide a slightly simplified example of how the Engine (specifically MinmaxAB) chooses the best move. 
On to the example:    
- the Game.java class calls getMove() in MinmaxAB  
- minimaxAB(this.state, 0, this.maxplayer, null, -Double.MAX_VALUE, Double.MAX_VALUE) is called in MinmaxAB to start the algorithm  
- If the previous move was not null (initial call) the previous move is executed
- minimaxAB calls getLegalMoves() in Player to receive an array with the available moves in the current position
  - getLegalMoves() in Player calls getLegalMoves() for all of its pieces and combines the results into an array
    - Each of the moves in the pieces are first constructed (a call to the Move class) and compiled into an array by getMoves()
    - Then the legality of these moves is evaluated for the current position and non-legal moves are removed based on the movement of         the given piece by getLegalMoves in the piece
  - getLegalMoves() in Player further evaluates the moves, removing moves that would leave the king in check
  - getLegalMoves() in Player sorts the moves based on whether the moves include a capture of a minor/major piece, a pawn, or no
  capture and then returns the array
- if the array is empty, minimaxAB checks to see if the king is checked in the current position using checkForMate()
- if checkForMate() is true, the previous player's score is set to 1000000 to signify a mate in the position and the previous 
move is returned 
- If it is false, the previous player's score is set to 0.0 and the previous move is returned
- if current depth equals maxdepth the latest move is returned
- minimaxAB now iterates on the array of moves provided by getLegalMoves()
- minimaxAB(copystate, depth + 1, minimizing, currentMove, alpha, beta) is called for each move in the array (minimizing 
refers to the opponent and copystate is a copy of the current boardstate, the minimizing player's movescore is a separate 
variable called minscore)
- the previous steps are repeated until maximum depth is reached or the game ends(mate or stalemate)
- for the move returned by minimaxAB.getPlayer().getScore() is called to determine the score of the move
- if the score is > maxScore (or < minScore for the opponent's moves) minimax saves the move in a variable 
- Next minmaxAB checks to see if moveScore > alpha, in which case the value of alpha is now moveScore, followed by a check to 
see if alpha > beta the loop is broken and no further moves need to be investigated
- The best move is returned by minimaxAB    
        
(Teen t채st채 sekvenssidiagrammin tulevina p채ivin채)

### Achieved performance 
#### MinmaxAB
Currently the MinmaxAB implementation is actually decent. Some additional time is spent copying boardstates for moves (which strictly speaking is not necessary, but was rather difficult to get rid of without causing issues with the implementation of the model). Outside of getting rid of this this, the main way to improve performance for the algorithm itself would be actually building and sustaining a tree during the initial search. After this, the executed node would be turned into the root of the tree, and other subtrees would be disregarded. Then only the nodes at maximum depth would need to be searched, providing a significant improvement to performance. This was mostly not done due to time constraints with the project. As the Minmax algorithm logically already works like a tree, this would not be too difficult to implement.
 
#### Model
The Model implementation could be improved a lot in terms of performance. Mainly the issues lie in Moves and Boardstates being redundantly copied and each call of King isInCheck() (required for possible move) requiring every possible move by the opponent to be generated. There likely is a way to subvert this by only only generating new moves for Pieces that had their moves affected by the previous move. This is non-trivial to implement and would require some work in several areas of the application. If somehow implemented however, it would likely be useable to only generate Moves for Pieces that were affected in Player.getLegalMoves() as well. All in all with realistic changes, without a complete rewrite of the code, move generation could probably be made to be faster by a factor of 100, with the mentioned changes and more efficient data structures. Of course, this number is just a guess really.

Of course the best Chess engines typically use a Bitboard to handle their internal states efficiently, and that would be preferable for this as well and provide an even greater improvement for processing speed. I deemed this to be unnecessary for the goals of the course, and require too much research to implement. If I ever build another engine, I will likely try to utilize this from the beginning, however.


-- Actual numbers on performance to be included here --


